\pagenumbering{roman}

# Acknowledgements

One of the difficulties of returning to university to pursue a PhD after
decades of working in the field is that there are too many people to thank for
helping you along the way. It's pretty much impossible to do it any justice. So
rather than pretend I'd like to thank a few very special people who set
me on my path, and have helped me along the way. Mom and Dad, I never wrote
a proper thank you to you in my high school graduation yearbook. I owe so much
to you, your teamwork, your care for life and memory, and your hope for the
present and the future. I know that the best parts of anything I've done have
grown from the love you have given me. Matthew, thank you for always reminding
me of the importance of connecting with others, and the value of a quick wit,
sense of humor, and the gift of music, when it is most needed. John, thank you
for being my intellectual companion, even as the years have separated us in
space, I continue to draw on your creative imagination and curiosity. Charlie,
Graham and Maeve, thank you for grounding me, for challenging me, and for
showing me how to continue to grow as a human being, and as your Dad. Kathy and
Ron, thanks for having confidence in me, and showing me how to live for life
and family. Finally, Kesa, none of this would have gotten done if it wasn't for
you. I know you know this already. I don't say it hardly enough but your joyful
light shines so brightly, every day, and helps me see. Thank you for sharing
your gift of pragmatism with me--not a cynical ends justifies the means
philosophy, but a centering concern for the present and people in all their
complexities. Thanks for being here written between the lines.

\newpage


