\pagenumbering{roman}

# Acknowledgments

One of the difficulties of returning to university to pursue a PhD after
decades of working in the field is that there are too many people to thank.
I never thought I'd need so many people! Of course this dissertation would
never have come to fruition if it wasn't for the help I received from
my advisor Ricky Punzalan. Ricky encouraged me to read widely and deeply in the
archival studies literature, and to fully engage in the practice of writing.
After having spent so much of my professional life focused on building tools,
Ricky taught me the value of building ideas, as tools for the mind. When Ricky
moved back to the University of Michigan we weren't able to continue our walk
and talk meetings as we went in search of coffee. But he chose to continue to
support my work from afar when it would have been much easier to focus on his
new students and responsibilities. I will always be thankful for that
Ricky.

Also I want to thank the other members of my committee: Kari, Katrina, Matthew
and Wayne. You all were so generous with your time listening to me, reading
drafts, sometimes at very difficult times in the semester, and amidst the chaos
of the coronavirus pandemic. I am very lucky to have had you as first readers
of my work. I want to give special thanks to Kari for helping me shape my
research questions early on in my studies at Maryland. I also should thank
Matthew for the opportunity to teach alongside him in his digital studies
seminar, which gave me an real appreciation for how to meaningfully engage
students in conversation and scholarly debate. I was also very fortunate to
have been a student of Jessica Vitak and Thurka Sangaramoorthy whose
qualitative and ethnographic methods classes proved so important to my research
project. And finally I should thank the staff at the Maryland Institute for
Technology in the Humanities, and especially Trevor Mu√±oz and Grace Babukiika,
for their constant support in helping me make time for my research amidst the
constant work of MITH.

But rather than pretend that this list is actually complete (it isn't) I'd like
to conclude by thanking a few close people who set me on my path, and helped me
along the way. Mom and Dad, I never wrote a proper thank you to you in my high
school graduation yearbook. I owe so much to you: your teamwork, your care for
life and memory, and your hope for the present and the future. I know that the
best parts of anything I've done have grown from the love you have given me.
Matthew, thank you for always reminding me of the importance of connecting with
others, and the value of a quick wit, sense of humor, and the gift of music,
when it is most needed. John, thank you for being my intellectual companion,
even as the years have separated us in space, I continue to draw on your
creative imagination and curiosity. Charlie, Graham and Maeve, thank you for
grounding me, for challenging me, and for showing me how to continue to grow as
a human being, and as your Dad. Kathy and Ron, thanks for your trust and
confidence in me, and showing me how to live for life and family. Finally,
Kesa, none of this would have gotten done if it wasn't for you. I know you know
this already. I don't say it hardly enough but your joyful light shines so
brightly, every day, and helps me see. Thank you for sharing your pragmatism
with me: not a cynical ends-justifies-the-means philosophy, but a centering
wisdom and concern for the present and the people in it, in all their
complexities. Thanks for being here, written between these lines.

\newpage
