# Sat Jul 20 13:35:43 EDT 2019

I'm starting this file as a way to reflect on the writing process and mostly as
a place to jot down notes for ideas that come up during the writing process--so
that I stand a great chance of not forgetting them. We'll see how it goes I
guess...

I should make the connection between appraisal and bias in Machine Learning
somewhere in the intro.  The practices of appraisal shape the data that are
collected, and similarly will impact any kind of statistical analysis that is
done on the resulting data. I think pointing at Critical Data Studies here will
be important.

Move the discussion of governmentality to the beginning of the literature review
section to introduce the idea and foreshadow a discussion at the end.

# Tue Jul 23 15:05:34 EDT 2019

Thinking a bit about the ontology of the archival record. The artifact that is
being preserved in the NSDL is not a static given thing, but something that is
in transformation, by running the software and submitting it to various
extractions different layers of files are surfaced.  These files are like
objects being exposed by pulling back layers of sediment using various
archeological tools.  The existence of the archival record is in a state of
becoming, it is not a given but something that is discovered through processes
that are themselves points of contention.

It is somewhat difficult to see the connection between governmentality and the
work of the NSRL, mostly because the *government* aspect is starting me in the
face. It seems too obvious in a way. But it could be useful to think about how
the case of forensics, and fixity specifically, becomes an interest of digital
preservationists, as an aspect of governance in the NSDL context that is
internalized by professions and the profession. How do aspects of digital
curation, like fixity and file system identification, that are borrowed from the
digital forensics community get applied in digital preservation systems. This
reminds me quite a bit of how diplomatics are used in projects like the
InterPARES project have focused on authenticity.

