---
title: Legibility Machines
subtitle: Archival Appraisal and the Genealogies of Use
author: Ed Summers
geometry: "left=1in,right=1in,top=1in,bottom=1in"
fontsize: 12pt
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{setspace}
  - \usepackage{fontspec}
  - \usepackage{ragged2e}
  - \setmainfont{Times New Roman}
  - \doublespacing

---

\newpage

# Abstract

The web is a site of constant breakdown in the form of broken links, failed
business models, unsustainable infrastructure, obsolescence and general neglect.
Some estimate that about a quarter of all links break every 7 years, and even
within highly curated regions of the web, such as scholarly publishing, rates of
link rot can be as high as 50%. Over the past twenty years web archiving
projects at cultural heritage organizations have worked to stem this tide of
loss. Yet, we still understand little about the diversity of actors involved in
web archiving, and how content is selected for web archives. This is due in
large part to the ontological politics of web archives, and how archiving the
web often takes place out of sight at the boundaries between human and technical
activity.

This dissertation explores appraisal practices in web archives from the
perspective of Science and Technology Studies in order to answer two motivating
research questions. 1) How is appraisal currently being enacted in web archives?
2) How do definitions of what constitutes a web archive shape the practice of
appraisal? In order to answer these questions data was collected from interviews
with practicing web archiving professionals, as well as a year long ethnographic
field study with a large federally funded web archive. Thematic analysis,
critical discourse analysis and grounded theory were used as part of
triangulation research method to generate a thick and layered description of
archival practice.

The results of this analysis highlight three fundamental characteristics of
appraisal in web archives: time, ontology and use. As expressions of value
appraisal decisions do not simply occur at discrete moments in the life cycle of
records, but instead as part of archival processes that repeat, spread out, and
evolve over time. Furthermore the values in inherent in appraisal are an
expression of a specific archival enterprise, but web archives are multiple, and
are not bound to an established or predefined assemblage of actors, technologies
and practices. Artificially limiting our definition of what constitutes a web
archive truncates our understanding of the web and archival practices. And
finally, understanding appraisal values in web archives is fundamentally tied to
their use, but use is not singular and encompasses strategies of disuse and
misuse.

Understanding appraisal in web archives along these three axes of time, ontology
and use provides insight into the dynamics that shape our memory of the past
that is mediated by the web. It also significantly informs pedagogy in archival
studies, not just for web archives, but for archives in general. As machine
learners increasingly become readers of web archives the stakes for
understanding the dynamics by which these archival assemblages are built could
not be higher.

\newpage

\tableofcontents

\newpage

\newpage
