\pagebreak

## I. Introduction

For a moment try to imagine your day to day life without the web and the underlying Internet. It is difficult to do because the web is a communications infrastructure that is completely enmeshed in global systems of capital, governance, science and culture. However, somewhat paradoxically, we experience the loss of the web on a daily basis, every time we click a link only to get a *404 Not Found* error. The architectural precarity of our "World Wide Web" is constantly being made visible to us. These quotidian breakdowns are so common that we have come to expect, or even anticipate them. The continual loss of the web and its broken links become part of the infrastructural background in the metaphor of *The Cloud* [@Hu:2015]. But what remains of this backgrounding, or evaporation, is an archival anxiety that asks: What will we remember of our current epoch? Are we really living in what will be known as a *digital dark age*? [@Kuny:1997 ; @Hedstrom:1991] Or perhaps we are living in the ruins of a digital dark age right now?

Partly in response to this archival anxiety we have witnessed the emergence of *web archiving* as an increasingly significant activity. Web archiving is the practice of collecting content from the web for preservation, which is then made accessible at another part of the web known as a *web archive*. Web archiving is typically preformed by memory institutions (libraries, archives and museums), but increasingly it is individuals who take up the work themselves [@Lee:2011]. Developing record keeping practices for selecting, collecting and preserving web content is proving to be an extremely important endeavor for historical production [@Brugger:2017] and for sustaining the networked public sphere [@Benkler:2006 ; @Lessig:2006]. However, even with close to two decades of practice we understand surprisingly little about the day to day processes by which content is being *selected* for web archives. 

At the same time, our experience of using the web and the Internet is suffused with constant, ever present, and often invisible data collection. These data flows pool into vast corporate and government data archives that have come to be referred to in shorthand as *Big Data*. For example, in 2015 Facebook was collecting two billion photographs a day from its users, which at that time required hundreds of petabytes of storage [@Bandaru:2015]. Always-on mobile computing technologies, the *Internet of Things* and *smart cities* provide the foundations and infrastructure for a panoply of data capture and processing platforms that have become an integral and even essential parts of our daily lives. @Hoskins:2018a calls these new data archives, and their attendant processual flows *shadow archives*:

> The archive has traditionally been seen (like other media) as separate 
> and external to the self, as something with institutional status, as
> variously a place and space for the storage of artefacts of the past 
> that give rise to remembering. Yet, the medial gathering and splintering 
> of individual, social and cultural imaginaries, increasingly networked 
> through sortable and pervasive digital media and communication devices, 
> attach shadow archives to much of everyday life, that also blend and 
> complicate that which was once considered as distinctly public and private.
> (p. 87)

Shadow archives are physically and conceptually remote, are often beyond our individual control, cognition, and are usually only readable in full by the institutions who created them. These archives surface on the web in various ways, but are characterized not by an anxiety about what will be remembered, but rather by what will not be forgotten [@Mayer:2011].

Most importantly for my discussion here, these shadow archives are constructed both *in* and *of* the web, and operate as web archives just as much as the previously mentioned web archives operated by cultural heritage organizations. They are *shadow* archives in a second sense, in that they sit behind normalized conceptions of what *web archives* are, as a specific deployment of software, hardware and networked infrastructure. In addition to manifesting as *Big Data* these web archives can also take the shape of modest, thematically arranged websites [@Fenlon:2017] or *Small Data* [@Abreu:2013]. Questions of what to collect, what not to collect, what to remember, and what to forget, are sites of controversy and anxiety, that surface on the web, and become encoded into the architecture and infrastructure of the web.
 
In this paper I will explore the art and science of deciding what web archives collect by reviewing the literature of archival appraisal through the theoretical lens of Science and Technology Studies. I will suggest that our anxieties around what web archives remember and forget, which are embodied in dreams (or nightmares) of Big Data or The Cloud, can be understood by attending to the specific material practices of people working with memory and machines. I will argue that it is useful to understand how these material practices operate within, in response to, or outside of conceptions of the archive as an instrument of governmentality. But first, let me provide a brief thumbnail sketch of these areas of appraisal and practice and how they relate to web archiving, before taking a deeper dive into each, and concluding with some remarks about research areas that open up from considering them together.

Deciding what to keep, and what to discard, is a central theme in the field of archival studies--some even say it is the archivist's first and most important responsibility [@Cox:1988] or "the most significant archival function" [@Brichford:1977]. Over the past two centuries archival theorists have developed a body of literature around the concept of *appraisal*, which is broadly defined by the Society of American Archivists as the "process of identifying materials offered to an archives that have sufficient value to be accessioned". Document production, which began with the innovation of writing, and rapidly accelerated with the publishing technologies of moveable type, the printing press, photography, lithography, xerography, and computer automation has made it increasingly necessary for archivists to recognize their pivotal role in deciding what documents get to be called *archival records*.

As a practical matter, for an archive to exist, appraisal decisions must be made, which necessarily shape the archive over time, and by extension also shape our knowledge of the past [@Bearman:1989 ; @Cook:2011]. It is in the particular contingencies of the historical moment that the archive is created, sustained and used [@Booms:1987 ; @Harris:2002]. And yet the desire for a technology that will enable a complete archival record of the web, where everything is preserved and remembered, is a strangely persistent idea, or aspirational goal, with many social and political ramifications [@Brothman:2001 ; @Mayer:2011]. Reviewing this literature of appraisal, with an eye to understanding the appraisal of content on the web is the first focus of this paper.

Part of the reason for the gap in our understanding about how web content is being selected for preservation is a matter of scale. Considered as a whole the web is an unfathomably large, decentralized and constantly changing information landscape. Unlike a box of photographs in an attic, that may find its way into a Hollinger box on a shelf in an archive, web content seems to come to us from *The Cloud* [@Hu:2015], and appears to resist the archival imagination that has traditionally focused on *information as thing* [@Buckland:1991].

The web is a site of constant breakdown in the form of broken links, failed business models, unsustainable infrastructure, obsolescence and general neglect. @Ceglowski:2011 has estimated that about a quarter of all links break every 7 years. Even within highly curated regions of the web, such as scholarly publishing [@Sanderson:2011] and jurisprudence [@Zittrain:2014] rates of link rot can be as high as 50%. Web archiving projects work in varying measures to stem this tide of loss: to save what is deemed worth saving before it becomes 404 Not Found. In this light, web archiving can be seen as a form of repair or maintenance work [@Graham:2007 ; @Jackson:2014] that is conducted by archivists, collaborating with each other, while also deeply engaged with tools and infrastructures and platforms that aid them in their work. Attention to issues of repair and maintenance and the larger field of Science and Technology Studies (STS) suggests an examination of web archiving as a set of material practices that includes activities such as website design, upgrades, storage backups, and the porting of content from one content management system to another. I will review how this lens of repair and maintenance helps us think about web archiving as *practice* forms the second part of my analysis.

The construction of web archives, and the maintenance of the web, fold together, and present challenges and opportunities for archivists as they work  with content creators, systems, services and other bespoke software. It is important that our knowledge of these systems be informed by an analysis of the social, technical and material practices by which web content is selected for an archive. Thus appraisal in web archives is fundamentally an epistemological question. How do web archives generate facts, evidence and knowledge? In short, how do we know what we know on the web? Appraisal practices for the web manifest at the interface layer, which itself is a fractal of the infrastructure of the web itself. I will conclude the paper by outlining a research agenda for web archives that opens up from an analysis of appraisal, practice and the web. But first, let's examine the concept of archival appraisal in more detail.


