\pagenumbering{arabic}

# I. Introduction

For a moment try to imagine your day to day life without the web and the underlying Internet. It is difficult to do because the web is a communications infrastructure that is completely enmeshed in global systems of capital, governance, science and culture. However, somewhat paradoxically, we experience the loss of the web on a daily basis, every time we click a link only to get a *404 Not Found* error. The architectural precarity of our "World Wide Web" is constantly being made visible to us. These quotidian breakdowns are so common that we have come to expect, or even anticipate them. The continual loss of the web and its broken links become part of the infrastructural background in the metaphor of the constantly changing cloud [@Hu:2015]. But what remains of this backgrounding, or evaporation, is an archival anxiety that asks: What will we remember of our current epoch? Are we really living in what will be known as a *digital dark age*? [@Kuny:1997 ; @Hedstrom:1991] Or perhaps we are living in the ruins of a digital dark age right now?

Partly in response to this archival anxiety we have witnessed the emergence of
*web archiving* as an increasingly significant activity. Web archiving is the
practice of collecting content from the web for preservation, which is then made
accessible at another part of the web known as a *web archive*. Web archiving is
typically preformed by memory institutions (libraries, archives and museums),
but increasingly it is individuals who take up the work themselves [@Lee:2011].
Developing record keeping practices for selecting, collecting and preserving web
content is proving to be an extremely important endeavor for historical
production [@Brugger:2017] and for sustaining the networked public sphere
[@Benkler:2006 ; @Lessig:2006]. Archivists use the term *appraisal* to talk
about the theories and methods that determine what records are collected in an
archive. However, even with close to two decades of practice we understand
surprisingly little about the day to day processes by which content is being
appraised for web archives. 

At the same time, our experience of using the web and the Internet is suffused
with constant, and often invisible, data collection. These data flows pool into
vast corporate and government data archives that have come to be referred to in
shorthand as *Big Data*. For example, in 2015 Facebook was collecting two
billion photographs a day from its users, which at that time required hundreds
of petabytes of storage [@Bandaru:2015]. Always-on mobile computing
technologies, the *Internet of Things* and *smart cities* provide the
infrastructure for a host of data capture and processing platforms that have
become an essential parts of our daily lives. @Hoskins:2018a calls these new
data archives, and their attendant processual flows *shadow archives*:

> The archive has traditionally been seen (like other media) as separate 
> and external to the self, as something with institutional status, as
> variously a place and space for the storage of artefacts of the past 
> that give rise to remembering. Yet, the medial gathering and splintering 
> of individual, social and cultural imaginaries, increasingly networked 
> through sortable and pervasive digital media and communication devices, 
> attach shadow archives to much of everyday life, that also blend and 
> complicate that which was once considered as distinctly public and private.
> (p. 87)

Shadow archives are physically and conceptually remote, are often beyond our
individual control, cognition, and are usually only readable in full by the
entities that created them. These archives surface on the web in various ways,
but are characterized not by an anxiety about what will be remembered, but
rather by what will not be forgotten [@Mayer:2011].

Most importantly for my discussion here, these shadow archives are constructed
both *in* and *of* the web, and operate as web archives just as much as the
previously mentioned web archives operated by cultural heritage organizations.
They are *shadow* archives in a second sense, in that they sit behind or to the
side of normalized conceptions of what *web archives* are, as a specific
deployment of software, hardware and networked infrastructure. In addition to
manifesting as *Big Data* web archives can take the shape of thematically
arranged websites [@Fenlon:2017] or *Small Data* [@Abreu:2013]. Questions of
what to collect, what not to collect, what to remember, and what to forget, are
sites of controversy and anxiety, that surface on the web, and are entangled
with standards, protocols and infrastructure. How is it that our idea of what
constitutes a *web archive* have become stabilized, and how does this
stabilization relate to our decisions about what to archive?
 
In this dissertation I explore the art and science of deciding what web archives
collect (how they appraise). I suggest that our anxieties around what web
archives remember and forget, can be understood by attending to the specific
material practices of people working with memory and machines. Web archives are
legibility projects, or calculative practices, that include, but also escape
normative definitions of web archives as a specific technical apparatus.
Recognizing the full shape of web archives through the theoretical lens of
*governmentality* [@Foucault:2008 ; @Lemke:2019] clarifies how the supposed
value of archival records is not a property of the records themselves or their
context, but is rather a function of the how the records are embedded in
architectures of use over time--their genealogies of use. This insight into web
archives also suggests a reorientation in how we think about appraisal in
archives more generally.

Deciding what to keep, and what to discard, is a central theme in the field of
archival studies--some even say it is the archivist's first and most important
responsibility [@Cox:1988] or "the most significant archival function"
[@Brichford:1977]. Over the past two centuries archival theorists have developed
a body of literature around the concept of *appraisal*, which is broadly defined
by the Society of American Archivists as the "process of identifying materials
offered to an archives that have sufficient value to be accessioned". Document
production, which began with the innovation of writing, and rapidly accelerated
with the publishing technologies of movable type, the printing press,
photography, lithography, xerography, and computer automation has made it
increasingly necessary for archivists to recognize their pivotal role in
deciding what documents get to be called *archival records*.

As a practical matter, for an archive to exist, appraisal decisions must be
made, which necessarily shape the archive over time, and by extension also shape
our knowledge of the past [@Bearman:1989 ; @Cook:2011]. It is in the particular
contingencies of the historical moment that the archive is created, sustained
and used [@Booms:1987 ; @Harris:2002]. And yet the desire for a technology that
will enable a complete archival record of the web, where everything is preserved
and remembered, is a strangely persistent idea, or aspirational goal, with many
social and political ramifications [@Brothman:2001 ; @Mayer:2011]. Reviewing
this literature of appraisal, with an eye to understanding the appraisal of
content on the web is the first focus of this paper.

Part of the reason for the gap in our understanding about how web content is
being selected for preservation is a matter of scale. Considered as a whole the
web is an unfathomably large, decentralized and constantly changing information
landscape. Unlike a box of photographs in an attic, that may find its way into a
Hollinger box on a shelf in an archive, web content seems to come to us from
*The Cloud* [@Hu:2015], and appears to resist the archival imagination that has
traditionally focused on *information as thing* [@Buckland:1991].

The web is a site of constant breakdown in the form of broken links, failed
business models, unsustainable infrastructure, obsolescence and general neglect.
@Ceglowski:2011 has estimated that about a quarter of all links break every 7
years. Even within highly curated regions of the web, such as scholarly
publishing [@Sanderson:2011] and jurisprudence [@Zittrain:2014] rates of link
rot can be as high as 50%. Web archiving projects work in varying measures to
stem this tide of loss: to save what is deemed worth saving before it becomes
404 Not Found. In this light, web archiving can be seen as a form of repair or
maintenance work [@Graham:2007 ; @Jackson:2014] that is conducted by archivists,
collaborating with each other, while also deeply engaged with tools and
infrastructures and platforms that aid them in their work. Attention to issues
of repair and maintenance and the larger field of Science and Technology Studies
(STS) suggests an examination of web archiving as a set of material practices
that includes activities such as website design, upgrades, storage backups, and
the porting of content from one content management system to another. I will
review how this lens of repair and maintenance helps us think about web
archiving as *practice* forms the second part of my analysis.

The construction of web archives, and the maintenance of the web, entail each
other, and present challenges and opportunities for archivists as they work with
content creators, computational systems, services and other bespoke software. It
is important that our knowledge of these systems be informed by an analysis of
the social, technical and material practices by which web content is selected
for an archive. Decisions about what to collect from the web in a web archive
are *co-produced* by the technical means that are used [@Jasanoff:2006]. How
appraisal is enacted in web archives is fundamentally both an epistemological
and an ontological question. How do web archives generate facts, evidence and
knowledge? How does our idea of what constitutes a web archive and the record
[@Yeo:2007 ; @Yeo:2008] shape that knowledge?  Appraisal practices for the web
manifest at the interface layer, which is itself a fractal of the infrastructure
of the web itself.

Considering these topics led me to ask two overarching research questions in
this dissertation. First, how is appraisal being enacted in web archives? What
do we know about current practices and how web records are valued? Secondly, how
do definitions of what constitutes a web archive relate to the practice of
appraisal? Relative to archival practice, the web is still fairly new.
Understanding the values by which web archives are built requires a clear
understanding of what we mean by a *web archive*. I will explore answers to
these two questions by analyzing interviews with practicing web archivists and
drawing on the results of a year long field study with a large federally funded
archive engaged with archiving portions of the web. I will conclude by outlining
a research agenda for web archives that opens up from an analysis of appraisal,
practice and the web, and links the value of records to their use. To get
started it is important to first review what we know about the concept of
archival appraisal and especially how it relates to the web.

\pagebreak
