\pagebreak

## III. Appraisal and Web Archives

And so we return to the question that we started with: how are we deciding what to archive from the web? Or, how does the constellation of archival praxis around appraisal that we have just discussed meet with web archiving practices? You will notice that so far there has been very little discussion of the actual materials that are the subject of appraisal. It's almost as if our theories of appraisal are thought to function independently of the material being appraised; that in principle (if not in fact) appraisal can be applied as needed to all forms of media. Indeed, this abstractedness is part of appraisal's claim to theory in the first place, and forming part of an archival *science*.

However the birth of appraisal, or the awareness that records *must* be selected, in some fashion, by the archivist, occurs in a particular historical moment of profound material transformation, as the technologies of record production completely outstrip the archivists ability to process their outputs. This *overcoming* of the archivist, and the concomitant appraisal response, are not simply the result of an increased volume of records, or information overload [@Ham:1981]. The concept of archival appraisal arrives as the centuries old archival technologies of paper, print and their containers are giving way to a proliferation of electronic media formations, which challenged and continue to challenge the archival imagination [@Taylor:1988]. @Cook:1994 suggests that appraisal is perhaps more of a sensibility than an abstract theory, for the way it offers an approach to practice, and a consolation amidst this transformation:

> Most important, for the first time, we are not producing, managing, 
> and saving physical things or artifacts, but rather trying to understand 
> and preserve logical and virtual patterns that give electronic information 
> its structure, content, and context, and thus its meaning as a "record" 
> or as evidence of acts and transactions.

Here Cook casually deploys the idea of "virtual" records and the effects that they are having on archival practice. This virtuality derives at least in part from how computer technology collapses the media forms of word, picture, sound, video into a seemingly uniform binary representation--the so called ones-and-zeroes of digitality. However electronic records, especially born-digital-records, of which the web is a prime example, have actual material dimensions, and condense as the result of processual flows that involve platforms, infrastructures, networks, heuristics and algorithms. The virtuality of electronic records can be understood as what @Kirschenbaum:2008 calls a "screen essentialism" or medial ideology that effaces the instrumentation that creates, and must constantly recreate, the experience of an electronic document. At the same time, archives of the web are particularly prone to a technological solutionism that treats preservation as a purely technical problem, where we simply need more efficient and less error prone storage, more comprehensive crawling strategies, or improved network protocols in order to "archive it all".

Despite efforts to archive the entire web [@Kahle:2007], the idea of a complete archive of the web remains both economically infeasible [@Rosenthal:2012], and theoretically intractable [@Masanes:2006]. Features of the web’s Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), such as code-on-demand [@Fielding:2000], content caching [@Fielding:2014] and personalization [@Barth:2011], have transformed what was originally conceived of as a document oriented hypertext system into a complex multimedia information infrastructure that delivers content based on who you are, when you ask, and what software you use [@BernersLee:2000]. As a result, the very notion of a singular documentary artifact, which has been under significant strain since the introduction of photography [@Benjamin:1999a] and electronic records [@Bearman:1989], is now being pushed to its theoretical and conceptual breaking point. We rarely try to reason about *all* archival records that exist in the world as a singular assemblage. So why do we do this so naturally with the network of networks that we call the Internet, or the massively distributed text that is the web? Dissolving the seeming virtuality of web archives, and understanding both the web and web archives as social, historical and technical artifacts is essential for being able to talk about how web content is being selected for preservation (and access) in an archive. Now that we are 30 years into the web's existence we are in a position to turn from the innovation-centric approaches to web archives, to the critical investigation of established practices.

### Science and Technology Studies

In the early days of the web @Hedstrom:1991 proposed a broad research framework for the study of *electronic records*, or what some today might call computational archival systems. This framework was based on a *sociotechnical* understanding of archives that recognized the need for archival studies research to move beyond technological determinist accounts, where society is shaped by technology, as well as overly socially determinist accounts, where technology is shaped purely by social and political interests. In *sociotechnical* accounts both technology and society must be understood in terms of a complex interplay between people, materials and processes, where the technical and the social mutually shape, or coproduce, each other. This line of inquiry is especially relevant today,and builds upon the rich empirical foundations of Science and Technology Studies (STS) [@Bijke:1987 ; @Latour:1987 ; @Felt:2007].

Hedstrom's framework for research into electronic records included 1) the relationship between automation, electronic records and organizational change; 2) new material forms of electronic records and their remediation of previous forms; 3) the design of new information systems with archival properties; 4) evolving markets for information technology and their impacts on archival records; and 5) the impact of electronic records on accepted norms and approaches to archival preservation (e.g. provenance and appraisal). Hedstrom stressed how attending to the social, historical and material dimensions of information technology, was the cornerstone of archival studies:

> The introduction of new forms of material and the simultaneous 
> transformation of traditional forms into something new raises a series 
> of questions about the relationship between forms of material and archival
> practice. When should new forms of material be managed differently from 
> more traditional forms of documentation? Are there any archival 
> principles that apply to all new electronic record types? What
> characteristics does an electronic memo share with a memo on paper? What 
> does it have in common with other machine-readable records?

Hedstrom's framework holds up particularly well today, as many of these five areas have developed into full fledged fields of study. But this development, at least for the study of web archives, has mostly happened either in the domain of computer science where the concept of appraisal is infrequently used, or in the field of archival studies where the web is considered under the rubric of electronic records. Before discussing how STS can be applied to the study of appraisal in web archives I will briefly characterize these literatures and their perspective on web archives.

### Digital Libraries

The computer science literature reflects a decade long interest in *digital libraries*, particularly the research output of Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL), that for the last 20 years has served as a research forum for all manner of investigations into novel methods for collecting, storing, indexing, accessing and preserving content collected from the web. When it comes to appraisal, digital library research on the subject of web archives has focused in large part on the problems of *harvesting* or *crawling* the web. Practices for crawling the web for the purposes of indexing and maintenance are nearly as old as the web itself [@Fielding:1994]. However the actual dimensions of the web are still difficult to determine [@Dobra:2004], and the "deep web" presents challenges because of the way large regions of the web are hidden behind human driven query interfaces [@Madhavan:2008].

Substantial work has been done to measure the *archivability* of web content [@Banos:2015 ; @Samar:2014] and to determine the age of web resources [@SalahEldeen:2013], which are important factors to consider when deciding what to archive. Another significant consideration is the expected disappearance of a resource from the web. Numerous studies have investigated the transience of web resources, so called link decay, link rot, or reference rot, in order to characterize the likelihood of certain types of web content disappearing. Measures of link rot can be used to mobilize efforts at increased web archiving generally, as well as specific areas such as social media [@SalahEldeen:2013b] , science [@Hennessey:2013], institutional repositories [@Sanderson:2011], and jurisprudence [@Zittrain:2014].

The problem of knowing what to collect from the web has also been treated in the digital library research community as a *focused crawling* problem. In focused crawling the goal is to collect content about particular topics [@Risse:2012], events [@Yang:2012 ; @Klein:2018], or to collect content that has a particular characteristic such as popularity [@Page:1999], importance @BaezaYates:2005] or social engagement [@Gossen:2015a ; @Nwala:2018 ; @Milligan:2016]. Generally speaking these approaches take the focus to be a topic, event, person, organization that can be qualified by the types of media (documents, audio, video). These criteria are taken as a priori, or a given, that is decided out of band, before the task of doing the crawling is undertaken. Similarly there is also a vast research literature on relevancy ranking in web search results that is dependent first on having already amassed a collection of web documents to index. However how that corpus of documents has been assembled is usually taken as a given. Despite the lack of the use of the term appraisal, this vein of digital library research speaks to Hedstrom's call for archival studies to directly engage in the design of record keeping technologies for the web.

### Archival Studies

Within the field of archival studies there are numerous accounts of how appraisal applies to electronic records, but less so with regard to the web specifically. The term *electronic records* developed alongside computer automation to refer to the databases, electronic mail archives, and other types of data that accrue as *files* on a computer filesystem. These computer filesystems used the metaphors of paper based documents, files and containers for storing them, in order to make familiar a completely new information infrastructure. Designating these computer files as electronic records highlights how computer data is generated as part of the functioning of organizations, and provides evidence of that operation, in which authenticity, reliability and fixity are typically paramount [@Duranti:2010 ; @Cobb:2005 ; @Harvey:2010]. Discussion of electronic records also happens under the rubric of digital preservation [@Rothenberg:1999] or digital curation [@Yakel:2007]. In addition to the preservation of computer files and filesystems researchers have worked on means of format identification [@Hitchcock:2007] and pursued the use of software emulation to preserve and describe entire software systems [@Welch:2012 ; @McDonough:2010]. @Lee:2011a suggest that the term *digital curation* reflects a postcustodial response to digital preservation, that foregrounds the site of record production as outside the walls of the archive, instead of focusing entirely on the authenticity and fixity of data, and conventional ideas of the preservation lifecycle.

Electronic records, digital preservation and digital curation are largely predicated on prior custody of data, or the ready access to the computer systems (software and hardware) that the data has been produced on. These approaches tend to take as a given that the data is in fact available, and generally do not speak directly about the process of archival appraisal, or the social and technical means by which data is selected for preservation in an archive. As such the web presents a conundrum of sorts, where content *appears* openly available, and is often regarded as *public*. But even as they seem ready-to-hand, web documents also exist at a distance, sometimes in multiple locations, and are retrieved across blurred geopolitical boundaries, which the infrastructure of the Internet and the architecture of the web (when working) makes instantly available in the web browser.

Many accounts of the appraisal of web content take a case study approach where web content is collected to document a particular event or category of content. For example @Masanes:2006 examines the identification and crawling of websites relating to the French presidential and parliamentary elections in 2002 by the Bibliothèque nationale de France. In another prominent study @Schneider:2003a  detail approaches to creating a collection of web content at the Library of Congress related to the September 11 terrorist attacks. Changes to copyright law enabled national libraries to evaluate both broad and focused approaches to archiving entire top-level-domains (e.g. .fr or .pt) [@Lasfargues:2008 and @Gomes:2006]. The need for tools that allow *seed lists* (lists of URLs to archive) to be developed was articulated by @Pearce:2005. @Duncan:2016 describe how networks, such as professional consortia, are useful resources for curating seed lists. In addition there has been discussion of the use of social media and their Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) as a means for discovering web content for archiving events such the Arab Spring [@Arnold:2014] and the protests in Ferguson and the #BlackLivesMatter social movement [@Rollason:2015]. Web archives are also considered as a site for critical engagement with issues of social justice [@Aronson:2017].

In one of the more conceptual models of appraisal in web archives @Masanes:2006b analyzed the process of *selection*, which is broken down into three different phases: preparation, discovery and filtering. Preparation involves establishing a focus for the collection, as well as selecting the technology for performing the collection. Discovery involves the act of collection itself, which leverages both the structure of the web (endogenous) as well as external resources such as search engines and link hubs (heterogeneous). Filtering is a process by which collected material is selected for an archive based on quality, subject, genre and publisher. Masanès discusses the degree to which  automation can be used in these three phases, but unlike the previously mentioned case studies the discussion is prospective and largely unanchored from actual practice. For example, whether and how archivists are involved in the filtering of collected web content is not explored.

The architecture of the web presents fuzzy geographies, where it is not always clear where one website ends and another begins. The idea of a singular document, which is central to information science [@Buckland:1991], is put under strain by the web's use of hypermedia, which allows documents to be dynamically composed from heterogeneous sources. Practices for appraising the web diverges significantly from electronic records in that it necessarily involves collecting or assembling content from the Internet. Appraising web content also requires the means and mechanisms for reassembly, or replay, of the content later [@Andersen:2013] in order to assess what has been collected. This recursive assembly and reassembly of content is tightly bound up with the appraisal process itself, and is achieved with specialized tools [@Mohr:2004], that have particular design assumptions, goals and affordances built into them.

Zooming out from the technical specifics, appraisal in web archives also can be seen as a form of virtual reunification [@Punzalan:2014] where who the various stakeholders are, their conceptions of process and product, and goals in creating the archive are made manifest. However in the case of web archives this reunification was always already virtual, at least in the sense that they were very often born digital, as part of the accrual of data and documents in the network. Unpacking the very real social and material processes and practices that underly the virtuality presented by the web archive is a key component to understanding how archival appraisal on the web works.


