# III. Methodology

In the previous chapter I outlined the various ways that archivists have historically conceived of *appraisal*, including its more recent expression in the domains of digital curation and digital preservation. This review was a necessary first step in beginning to pose my specific research question which concerns how appraisal is being enacted in web archives. What emerged from this review is that it is useful to understand archival appraisal not only as a product of governance (a concern of organizations, institutions and the state), but also through what Foucault calls *governmentality*, or the microphysics of power. While it is increasingly accepted to conceive of archives as a technology of power [@Zinn:1977 ; @Jimerson:2009], the exercise of archival agency is found not only in the top-down operations of governments and institutions, but also in every day practices at multiple, dispersed sites spread throughout society: in workplaces, families, communities and *collectives* of all kinds, and even by individuals [@McKemmish:1996]. The concept of governmentality allows us to investigate the various, and sometimes divergent, sites of archival appraisal as part of a continuum. Governmentality shifts our focus to the *practices* of appraisal and how they can enact power relations and resistance as well as social justice and collective memory.

An additional related theme that the previous chapter introduced is that the question of how appraisal operates in *web* archives requires an analysis that accounts for the role that technology plays in these practices. Of course, technology has always been an active agent in record keeping. This in itself is nothing new. And yet we are only a few decades into a continuing and profound shift to electronic records, in which centuries old archival technologies of paper have given way to a digital regime of databases, data processing, and computer networks [@Bearman:1989]. As @Hedstrom:1991 outlines in her *Framework for Research on Electronic Records* the field of Science and Technology Studies (STS) provides a useful historical and theoretical perspective for understanding archives as sociotechnical systems, without privileging purely social or technical explanations. What gets deemed *archival*, and the very meaning of *preservation* and *access* are forged in the design of information processing systems, standardization practices, and material production. Similarly, the practices of *appraisal* in the context of the web, and even the definition of what constitutes a *web archive*, are the result of sociotechnical processes in which our design of algorithms, data formats and interfaces both produce and are produced by web technologies. As I will discuss in a moment, STS provides both a theoretical and methodological framework for researching the ontological dimensions of appraisal.

My research project thus theorizes appraisal in web archives as a *sociotechnical practice*, where these practices can be understood using the framework of *governmentality*. This chapter outlines a methodology for investigating the question of how archivists decide what to archive from the web, and what significance these findings have for larger questions about memory, technology and the web. The processes of how we choose to remember with the web are critical for ascertaining what our web archives *mean* [@Ketelaar:2001 ; @Maemura:2018]. However, it is important to remember that we humans are not the only readers of the records in web archives. The "meaning" of web archives is increasingly found in human-computer assemblages that are designed to "learn", or establish statistical patterns in archival data, so that very real decisions can be made in the world [@boyd:2012 ; @Mackenzie:2017]. Web archives are now assembled by machines, to be read by machines, for very human purposes. The stakes for understanding how records come to be in our web archives could not be higher.

## Algorithms as Culture

As sociotechnical assemblages, web archives are complex sites where humans and computers interact in deeply inter-connected ways. Indeed, on close inspection it is often difficult to untangle these relations to see where one begins and the other ends. Web archives are infrastructures of software and hardware that have been crafted by archivists and technologists over the past two decades to do something we've come to call "web archiving". Archivists and other types of users interact with these systems to collect particular regions of the web, and often times these systems evolve to help the further achievement of those goals. Finding techniques and methods for bringing the blurry boundaries and knotted relations of web archiving into focus is the task at hand.

Instead of being virtual, disembodied and abstracted, *algorithmic* processes are the result of distinct social and material practices, in very specific and highly contingent settings [@Geiger:2014]. I have introduced the term *algorithm* here because, as we will see, the appraisal of web content is increasingly automated by crawling procedures or heuristics. I also want to invite the methods of *Critical Algorithm Studies* to help answer the question of how appraisal operates in web archives. Critical Algorithm Studies centers the study of algorithms as material artifacts that participate in particular social settings.

Algorithms have traditionally been considered the sole domain of the computer scientist. For example here is a conventional definition of the term algorithm found in a popular undergraduate computer science textbook: 

> ... any well-defined computational procedure that takes some value, or set 
> of values, as *input* and produces some value, or set of values, as *output*. 
> An algorithm is thus a sequence of computational steps that transform 
> the *input* into the *output*. We can also view an algorithm as a tool 
> for solving a well specified computational problem. The statement of 
> the problem specifies in general terms the desired input/output 
> relationship. The algorithm describes a specific computational procedure 
> for achieving that input/output relationship. [@Cormen:2009, p. 5]

Notice how this definition works to scope the concept of the algorithm to a  particular setting: where an algorithm is a "tool", that helps solve a "problem" in terms of set of "inputs" and "outputs". The "problem" is computationally constrained, and presented out of band, almost as a given. The algorithmic problem is not to be questioned, problematized or investigated outside of its calculative dimensions -- it is to be solved, almost like a puzzle. But how is the problem defined? How will the solution be recognized? How do the shape and content of inputs and outputs change as conceptions of the problem and the solution are updated as the algorithm is implemented? These questions of process rather than simply processing push at the procedural definition of the algorithm, and invite us to consider how algorithms are positioned in larger sociotechnical settings that include material constraints such as energy, space and time, as well as the goals and politics of people, groups and organizations.

Seaver argues that algorithmic systems aren’t simply black boxes, or sites that can be opened, analyzed and understood [@Seaver:2017]. The study of algorithms requires a methodological approach that recognizes how algorithms are deployed in particular social settings, as part of specific material practices, that  operate in the world as part of *culture*, in addition to (not in place of) their manifestation as computational processes. In a memorable turn of phrase Seaver advises, "If you cannot see a human in the loop, you just need to look for a bigger loop."

Algorithmic systems can be quite difficult to study because they don't live in a particular place, and often aren’t known by a single individual. Algorithmic processes can be distributed between teams, systems and workflows that combine computation with people and their lived experiences. For Seaver the study of algorithmic systems in all these dimensions (including the computational) requires an approach that recognizes algorithms *as* culture, rather than algorithms operating simply *in* culture, both of which point to the use of *ethnography* as both method and theoretical orientation.

## Studying Up

Ethnography usually involves some form of participant observation of people in a particular setting in order to understand social worlds, using data collection tools such as field notes, interviews and surveys. However the study of algorithmic systems is often challenged by practical barriers to data collection using traditional participant observation techniques. Attempts to understand algorithmic processes often put the researcher right into the beating heart of an organization, where information can often be guarded for competitive reasons, or because the information itself could allow the company’s services to be subverted, gamed or otherwise criticized. Technical jargon and expert knowledge spread across individuals can act as a foil for understanding. The ethnographer finds themself in a position of what Nader calls "studying up", where the researcher is disadvantaged as they attempt to access a site of power [@Nader:1972]. For these reasons Seaver suggests that researchers employ Gusterson's method of *polymorphous engagement*, or "interacting with informants across a number of dispersed sites ... collecting data eclectically from a disparate array of sources in many different ways" [@Gusterson:1997]. Seaver refers to this using the shorthand of "scavenging" which is also echoed by Kitchin who suggests ethnography for the study of algorithms as sociotechnical *assemblages* using (by necessity) a wide variety of sources:

> Interviews and ethnographies of coding projects, and the wider institutional
> apparatus surrounding them (e.g., management and institutional 
> collaboration), start to produce such knowledge, but they need to 
> supplemented with other approaches, such as a discursive analysis 
> of company documents, promotional/industry material, procurement 
> tenders and legal and standards frameworks; attending trade fairs and 
> other inter-company interactions; examining the practices, structures 
> and behaviour of institutions; and documenting the biographies of 
> key actors and the histories of projects. @Kitchin:2016

Ethnography of algorithmic systems is also challenged by the nature of observational data that the researcher encounters. Algorithms are created by people, but they are also performed as computational systems that, as our previous definition made clear, are a function of a particular set of inputs and outputs. These inputs and outputs happen in time and leave traces of their operation: be they transaction logs, database entries, status messages and the like. Geiger and Ribes method of *trace ethnography* is useful in these settings because it assists in "revealing the often invisible infrastructure that underlie routinized activities, allowing researchers to generate highly empirical accounts of network-level phenomena without having to be present at every node" [@Geiger:2011]. This opens the ethnographer up to studying data traces in files and databases, much as they might also study participants use of language.

## Relations All the Way Down

Before diving into the specific details of how I am proposing to researching appraisal in web archives it is worth briefly situating Critical Algorithm Studies in the broader tradition in Science and Technology Studies, which will be helpful for grounding my own research project.

As we have just discussed, algorithms operate as discrete computational processes that transform input into output; but at the same time they also function as part of an information *infrastructure*, in which the algorithms are defined in terms of the practices and relations they are embedded in. Susan Leigh Star, one of Infrastructure Studies key theorists, stresses that infrastructures are *relational*, that they are not constituted by a particular set of objects or artifacts so much as they are embedded in practices that happen in time:

> ... we hold that infrastructure is a fundamentally relational concept. It 
> becomes infrastructure in relation to organized practices. Within a given 
> cultural context, the cook considers the water system a piece of working 
> infrastructure integral to making dinner; for the city planner, it becomes 
> a variable in a complex equation. Thus we ask, when--not what--is an 
> infrastructure. [@Star:1996, p. 4]

This attention to relations in infrastructure that Star identifies is something that Actor Network Theory (ANT) [@Latour:2005], or material semiotics more generally (@Law:2009) are interested in. For Latour, ANT "define[s] the social not as a special domain, a specific realm, or a particular sort of thing, but only as a very peculiar movement of re-association and reassembling" (p. 7). These movements are identified by a broadening of the types of actors that can participate in relations to include so called non-humans as *actants*, which multiplies the types of and complexity of relations. Latour uses the term *symmetry* as a shorthand for this idea of granting both humans and non-humans with measures of agency. These relations are made durable in material, strategy, discourse, and performance, which allows them to persist in time. 

In addition to tracing what is, and how these networks of relations are made durable, it is critically important to also consider the point of departure that is chosen for these descriptions: to factor in the role of power in whose stories we tell, and to account for how things "could have been otherwise" [@Star:1990]. Foucault's analysis of the micro-physics of power and governmentality clearly connects here. Yet these are questions not only of politics, but of ontology, recognizing that ontology can function as a totalizing force, but also exists as what Mol calls a *multiplicity*, where distinct practices generate new ways of being that coordinate in time [@Mol:2002].

## Two Projects

With these theoretical and methodological foundations in mind it is helpful to  return to my motivating research question before diving into how I plan to answer it. The general question of appraisal in web archives actually cleaves into two interrelated sub-questions:

**RQ1:** How is appraisal currently being enacted in web archives?

**RQ2:** How do definitions of what constitutes a *web archive* relate to the practice of appraisal?

RQ1 is *empirical* since it involves observation and data gathering to describe how appraisal is being performed in the field. The emphasis on *performance* here is intentional, since my purpose is not to make generalized and valid claims about of *all* appraisal practices in web archives. Instead I want to gain qualitative insight into the factors that motivate a discrete set of archivists in their decisions to collect content from the web, in order to better understand how appraisal is functioning in web archives.

RQ2 is *ontological* because it recognizes that decisions of what to collect from the web fundamentally define what a web archive is, and what it will become. At the same time, RQ2 also allows for appraisal decisions to be shaped by the material dimensions of web archives, or what web archives are. To borrow from Jasanoff, the infrastructures of web archives and their affordances could (we will see) be *coproduced* by practices of appraisal [@Jasanoff:2006]. For example standards can constrain and promulgate particular types appraisal practices in web archives. But these standards in turn reflect decisions made in the design of web archiving systems. Rather than one being a cause of the other, design decisions about how to assemble software, hardware, algorithms and computational resources in web archives are themselves a form of appraisal practice.

Law and Lien refer to this dual lens expressed by my two research questions as *empirical ontology* where questions of ontology are not concerned with describing a cosmology, uni-verse, or single dominant reality; but rather aim to describe how practices, or networks of actors, generate world views or multiple *ontologies* [@Law:2012]. As previously discussed above, the rich descriptions generated by ethnography are particularly well suited to the task of exploring these questions of practice, especially in the context of algorithms and data as culture. I will conduct two research projects to help answer these questions. Rather than each project being tied to one of the research questions, these research projects provide a zooming function, where the practices of multiple informants at multiple sites are analyzed, before diving into a year long field study at a specific location, in order to reassemble the relations discovered by zooming out again [@Nicolini:2009].
 
### Appraisal Talk
 
In the first research project I will conduct a series of semi-structured, ethnographic interviews with practicing archivists and archives adjacent people in order to hear how they decide what parts of the web to collect. An initial set of practitioners will be selected from a list of attendees at the Web Archives conference in Ann Arbor, Michigan on November 12-13, 2015 [@UM:2015]. This conference brought together a diverse set of individuals involved in web archiving: archivists, researchers who used web archives, administrators of museums and libraries, open source software developers, and vendor representatives. A set of interview questions will be developed, which will be used to guide participants into sharing information about how they select content from the web for their archives. Interviews will be recorded and transcribed, and inductive thematic analysis will be used to derive key factors that influence and shape appraisal practices in web archives.

After identifying emergent themes I will use Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) to examine in detail the words practitioners use, the conventions they have stabilized, the context they share, how they learn from each other in communities of practice [@Lave:1991], and the political work that these communicative practices perform. CDA offers a theoretical framework grounded in critical theory for analyzing how participants’ use of language reflects identity formation, figured worlds and social relations, while also addressing the larger sociotechnical context in which practice takes place. CDA helps examine how language use connects with issues of ideology and power, which are particularly relevant when considering archival appraisal as an inherently political act. The sociolinguist James Paul Gee has noted that "there are solid linguistic, even grammatical grounds, on which to argue that all language-in-interaction is inherently political." [@Gee:2004]

### Implementing Appraisal

In my second project I will conduct a year long field study at the
National Software Reference Library (NSRL) at the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) in Gaithersburg, Maryland. Since 1999 the NSRL has maintained the largest public repository of known software, out of which it publishes the Reference Data Set (RDS) which provides file profiles and file signatures for use by law enforcement and other organizations involved with computer forensic investigations. While not typically thought of as a web archive, the NSRL contains software packages that have been actively collected from the web as data. These files are stored, indexed and processed in order to publish the RDS that documents the fixities of hundreds of millions of computer files. Crucially, the NSRL needs to decide what software to collect, and in doing so must balance the needs of their customers with the architectural constraints of their repository infrastructure, staff and funding mandate. The NSRL has developed practices, technologies and standards, because of its unique role, and placement within the federal government.

As part of my field study I will document my observations and experiences as a participant observer in the NSRL using field notes gathered during weekly staff meetings, and interactions with NSRL staff as they go about their work. NIST's online collaborative environments (Slack, Bugzilla) will be analyzed in order to identify actors, systems and practices that are relevant for the process of appraisal. Techniques from Critical Algorithm and Data Studies as well as trace ethnography [@Geiger:2014] will be used to analyze available source code, and database schemas [@Thomer:2018] to trace appraisal activities. This data will be supplemented with in depth interviews with NIST employees that will provide additional materials for tracing the shape of appraisal in an infrastructural setting which does not necessarily fit with the traditional conception of a web archive. These interviews will focus on the personal stories of how these employees came to work at NIST with the NSRL, and explore how these individual stories work to form organizational narrative, memory and identity [@Linde:2009] that happen over long stretches of time [@Cohn:2013].

The resulting field notes and observational data will be analyzed using techniques from Actor Network Theory (ANT) which trace the activities of human and non-human agents in the performance of appraisal in the NSRL. Interviews will be coded using relevant themes, entities and relations that were identified in the previous CDA study. Field notes will be consulted in order to navigate what questions to ask of my informants, and how to relate to them, since they will be unstructured interviews. In addition, my field notes will help me analyze how my role in the NSRL, and my perspective on it and my research change during my time spent as a participant observer in the NSRL. Reflexivity is a key component since the ethnographer become the instrument of research, in the stories they choose to tell.

### Design

Implications for design maybe not practical, but rather implications for theory and/or method might be more practical. @Dourish:2006 

Hedstrom's call to get involved in design.

Ethnography of the design process itself.

Question the ontology of web archiving and the role of design.

> It is practice that gives form and meaning to technology; the focus of ethnography is the ways in which practice brings technology into being. From this perspective, and drawing again on the notions of reflexivity raised earlier, we might suggest that what ethnography problematizes is not the setting of everyday practice, but the practice of design. 

> What matters is not simply what those implications are; what matters is why, and how they were arrived at, and what kinds of intellectual (and moral and political) commitments they embody, and what kinds of models they reflect.

Chapter Outline?



\pagebreak

