# III. Methodology

In the previous chapter I outlined the various ways that archivists have
historically conceived of *appraisal*, including its more recent expression in
the domains of digital curation and digital preservation. This review was a
necessary first step in beginning to pose my specific research questions which
concern how appraisal is being enacted in web archives, and how web archives are
conceived. What emerged from this review is that it is useful to understand
archival appraisal not only as a product of governance (a concern of
organizations, institutions and the state), but also through what Foucault calls
governmentality, or the microphysics of power. While it is increasingly accepted
to conceive of archives as a technology of power [@Zinn:1977 ; @Jimerson:2009],
the exercise of archival agency is found not only in the top-down operations of
governments and institutions, but also in every day practices at multiple,
dispersed sites spread throughout society: in workplaces, families, communities
and *collectives* of all kinds, and even by individuals [@McKemmish:1996]. The
concept of governmentality allows us to investigate these sites of archival
appraisal as part of a continuum.  Governmentality shifts our focus to the
*practices* of appraisal and how they can enact power relations and resistance
as well as social justice and collective memory [@Punzalan:2016 ;
@Jacobsen:2013].

An additional related theme that the previous chapter introduced is that the
question of how appraisal operates in *web* archives requires an analysis that
accounts for the role that technology plays in these practices. Of course,
technology has always been an active agent in record keeping. This in itself is
nothing new. And yet we are only a few decades into a continuing and profound
shift to electronic records, in which centuries old archival technologies of
paper have given way to a digital regime of databases, data processing, and
computer networks [@Bearman:1989]. As @Hedstrom:1991 outlines in her *Framework
for Research on Electronic Records*, the field of Science and Technology Studies
(STS) provides a useful historical and theoretical framework for understanding
archives as sociotechnical systems, without privileging either social or
technical explanations. What gets deemed *archival*, and the very meaning of
*preservation* and *access* are forged in the design and use of information
processing systems, and attendant standardization practices. Similarly, the
practices of *appraisal* in the context of the web, and even the definition of
what constitutes a *web archive*, are the result of sociotechnical processes in
which our design of algorithms, data formats and interfaces both produce and are
produced by web technologies. STS provides both a theoretical and methodological
framework for researching the ontological dimensions of appraisal.

So, my research project theorizes appraisal in web archives as a sociotechnical
practice, where these practices can be understood using the framework of
governmentality. This chapter outlines a methodology for investigating the
question of how archivists decide what to archive from the web, and what
significance these findings have for larger questions about memory, technology
and the web. The processes of how we choose to remember with the web are
critical for ascertaining what our web archives *mean* [@Ketelaar:2001 ;
@Maemura:2018]. However, it is important to remember that us humans are not the
only readers of the records in web archives. The "meaning" of web archives is
increasingly found in human-computer assemblages that are designed to "learn",
or establish statistical patterns in archival data, so that very real decisions
can be made in the world [@boyd:2012 ; @Mackenzie:2017]. Web archives are now
assembled by machines, in order to be read by machines, for very human purposes.
The philosophical question of whether machines actually "understand" such
records or not is increasingly irrelevant, but the stakes for our  understanding
how records come to be in our web archives could not be higher.

## III.A. Algorithms as Culture

As sociotechnical assemblages, web archives are complex sites where humans and
computers collaborate to select web content for an archive. Indeed, on close
inspection it can often be difficult to untangle these relations and clearly
demarcate where one begins and the other ends. Web archives are infrastructures
of software and hardware that have been crafted by archivists and technologists
over the past two decades to do something we've come to call "web archiving".
Archivists and other types of users interact with these systems to collect
particular regions of the web, and these systems continue to change to help the
further achievement of those goals. Finding techniques and methods for bringing
these blurry boundaries and knotted relations of web archiving into focus is the
task at hand.

Instead of being purely virtual, disembodied and abstracted, *algorithmic*
processes are the result of distinct social and material practices, in very
specific and highly contingent settings [@Geiger:2014]. I have introduced the
term *algorithm* here because, as we will see, the appraisal of web content is
increasingly automated by crawling procedures or heuristics. I also want to use
the methods of *Critical Algorithm Studies* to help answer the question of how
appraisal operates in web archives. Critical Algorithm Studies centers the study
of algorithms as material artifacts that participate in particular social
settings.

Algorithms have traditionally been considered the sole domain of the computer
scientist. For example here is a conventional definition of the term algorithm
found in a popular undergraduate computer science textbook: 

> ... any well-defined computational procedure that takes some value, or set 
> of values, as *input* and produces some value, or set of values, as *output*. 
> An algorithm is thus a sequence of computational steps that transform 
> the *input* into the *output*. We can also view an algorithm as a tool 
> for solving a well specified computational problem. The statement of 
> the problem specifies in general terms the desired input/output 
> relationship. The algorithm describes a specific computational procedure 
> for achieving that input/output relationship. [@Cormen:2009, p. 5]

Notice how this definition works to scope the concept of the algorithm to a
particular setting: where an algorithm is a "tool", that helps solve a "problem"
in terms of set of "inputs" and "outputs". The "problem" is computationally
constrained, and presented out of band, almost as a given. The algorithmic
problem is not to be questioned, problematized or investigated outside of its
calculative dimensions -- it is to be solved, almost like a puzzle. But how is
the problem defined? How will the solution be recognized? How do the shape and
content of inputs and outputs change as conceptions of the problem and the
solution are updated as the algorithm is implemented? These questions of process
rather than simply processing push at the procedural definition of the
algorithm, and invite us to consider how algorithms are positioned in larger
sociotechnical settings that include material constraints such as energy, space
and time, as well as the goals and politics of people, groups and organizations.

Seaver argues that algorithmic systems aren’t simply black boxes, or sites that
can be opened, analyzed and understood [@Seaver:2017]. The study of algorithms
requires a methodological approach that recognizes how algorithms are deployed
in particular social settings, as part of specific material practices, that
operate in the world as part of *culture*, in addition to (not in place of)
their manifestation as computational processes. In a memorable turn of phrase
Seaver advises, "If you cannot see a human in the loop, you just need to look
for a bigger loop."

Algorithmic systems can be quite difficult to study because they don't live in a
particular place, and often aren’t known by a single individual. Algorithmic
processes can be distributed between teams, systems and workflows that combine
computation with people and their lived experiences. For Seaver the study of
algorithmic systems in all these dimensions (including the computational)
requires an approach that recognizes algorithms *as* culture, rather than
algorithms operating simply *in* culture, both of which point to the use of
*ethnography* as both method and theoretical orientation.

## III.B. Studying Up

Ethnography usually involves some form of participant observation of people in a
particular setting in order to understand social worlds, using data collection
tools such as field notes, interviews and surveys. However the study of
algorithmic systems is often challenged by practical barriers to data collection
using traditional participant observation techniques. Attempts to understand
algorithmic processes often put the researcher right into the beating heart of
an organization, where information can often be guarded for competitive reasons,
or because the information itself could allow the company’s services to be
subverted, gamed or otherwise critiqued. Technical jargon and expert knowledge
distributed across individuals in an organization can act as a foil for
understanding the dimensions of algorithms. The ethnographer finds themself in a
position of what Nader calls "studying up", where the researcher is
disadvantaged as they attempt to access a site of power [@Nader:1972]. For these
reasons Seaver suggests that researchers employ Gusterson's method of
*polymorphous engagement*, or "interacting with informants across a number of
dispersed sites ... collecting data eclectically from a disparate array of
sources in many different ways" [@Gusterson:1997]. Seaver refers to this using
the shorthand of "scavenging" which is also echoed by Kitchin who suggests
ethnography for the study of algorithms as sociotechnical *assemblages* using
(by necessity) a wide variety of sources:

> Interviews and ethnographies of coding projects, and the wider institutional
> apparatus surrounding them (e.g., management and institutional 
> collaboration), start to produce such knowledge, but they need to be
> supplemented with other approaches, such as a discursive analysis 
> of company documents, promotional/industry material, procurement 
> tenders and legal and standards frameworks; attending trade fairs and 
> other inter-company interactions; examining the practices, structures 
> and behaviour of institutions; and documenting the biographies of 
> key actors and the histories of projects. @Kitchin:2016

Ethnography of algorithmic systems is also challenged by the nature of
observational data that the researcher encounters. Algorithms are created by
people, but they are also performed as computational systems that, as our
previous definition made clear, are a function of a particular set of inputs and
outputs. These inputs and outputs happen in time and leave traces of their
operation: be they transaction logs, database entries, status messages and the
like. Geiger and Ribes method of *trace ethnography* is useful in these settings
because it assists in "revealing the often invisible infrastructure that
underlie routinized activities, allowing researchers to generate highly
empirical accounts of network-level phenomena without having to be present at
every node" [@Geiger:2011]. This opens the ethnographer up to studying data
traces in files and databases, much as they might also study participants use of
language.

## III.C. Relations All the Way Down

Before diving into the specific details of how I conducted this study on
appraisal in web archives it is worth briefly situating Critical Algorithm
Studies in the broader tradition in Science and Technology Studies, which will
be helpful for grounding my own research project.

As I have just outlined, algorithms operate as discrete computational processes
that transform input into output; but at the same time they also function as
part of an information *infrastructure*, in which the algorithms are defined in
terms of the practices and relations they are embedded in. Susan Leigh Star, one
key theorist of Infrastructure Studies, stresses that infrastructures are
*relational*, that they are not constituted by a particular set of objects or
artifacts so much as they are embedded in practices that happen in time:

> ... we hold that infrastructure is a fundamentally relational concept. It 
> becomes infrastructure in relation to organized practices. Within a given 
> cultural context, the cook considers the water system a piece of working 
> infrastructure integral to making dinner; for the city planner, it becomes 
> a variable in a complex equation. Thus we ask, when--not what--is an 
> infrastructure. [@Star:1996, p. 4]

This attention to relations in infrastructure that Star identifies are a concern
of Actor Network Theory (ANT) [@Latour:2005], or material semiotics more
generally (@Law:2009). For Latour, ANT "define[s] the social not as a special
domain, a specific realm, or a particular sort of thing, but only as a very
peculiar movement of re-association and reassembling" (p. 7). These movements
are identified by a broadening of the types of actors that can participate in
relations to include so called non-humans as *actants*, which multiplies the
types of and complexity of relations. Latour uses the term *symmetry* as a
shorthand for this idea of granting both humans and non-humans with measures of
agency. These relations are made durable in material, strategy, discourse, and
performance, which allows them to persist in time, or as Latour puts it
"technology is society made durable" [@Latour:1990]. 

In addition to tracing what is, and how these networks of relations are made
durable, it is also critically important to consider the point of departure that
is chosen for these descriptions: to factor in the role of power in whose
stories we tell, and to account for how things "could have been otherwise"
[@Star:1990]. Foucault's analysis of the micro-physics of power and
governmentality clearly connects here. Yet these are questions not only of
politics, but of ontology, recognizing that ontology can function as a
totalizing force, but also exists as what Mol calls a *multiplicity*, where
distinct practices generate new ways of being that coordinate in time
[@Mol:2002].

## III.D. Research Design

With these theoretical and methodological foundations in mind it is helpful to
now return to my motivating research questions before diving into how I plan to
answer them. The general question of how appraisal in web archives is happening
actually cleaves into two interrelated sub-questions:

**RQ1:** How is appraisal being enacted in web archives?

**RQ2:** How do definitions of what constitutes *web archives* relate to the
practice of appraisal?

RQ1 is *empirical* since it involves observation and data gathering to describe
how appraisal is being performed in the field. The emphasis on *performance*
here is intentional, since my purpose is not to make generalized and valid
claims about of *all* appraisal practices in web archives. Instead I want to
gain qualitative insight into the factors that motivate a discrete set of
archivists in their decisions to collect content from the web, in order to
better understand how appraisal is functioning in web archives.

RQ2 is *ontological* because it recognizes that decisions of what to collect
from the web fundamentally define what a web archive is, and what it will
become. At the same time, RQ2 also allows for appraisal decisions to be shaped
by the material dimensions of web archives, or what web archives *are*. To
borrow a term from Jasanoff, the infrastructures of web archives and their
affordances could (we will see) be *coproduced* by practices of appraisal
[@Jasanoff:2006]. For example, standards can constrain and promulgate particular
types appraisal practices in web archives. But these standards in turn reflect
decisions made in the design of web archiving systems. Rather than one being a
cause of the other, design decisions about how to assemble software, hardware,
algorithms and computational resources in web archives are themselves a form of
appraisal practice.

@Law:2012 refer to this dual lens expressed by my two research questions as
*empirical ontology*, where questions of ontology are not concerned with
describing a cosmology, uni-verse, or single dominant reality; but rather aim to
describe how practices, or networks of actors, generate world views or multiple
*ontologies*. As previously discussed above, the rich descriptions generated by
ethnography are particularly well suited to the task of exploring these
questions of practice, especially in the context of algorithms and data as
culture.

To answer my research questions I conducted three empirical studies, which I
will detail in chapters 4, 5 and 6. These three studies are coordinated using
between-method triangulation in order to generate a thick description of
appraisal in web archives [@Denzin:1978; p. 302]. The three qualitative methods
that will be triangulated are: thematic analysis, critical discourse analysis
and ethnography. The application of each of these methods will be discussed more
below, and in detail in their respective chapters. It is important to stress
here at the outset that the purpose of triangulation is not for validation or
verification, where the results of one method verify the results of another
method, but rather to render a thick description. Taken together the data
generated by these three methods is summative: one method's strength compensates
for anothers blind spot.

Thick description is a term first used by linguistic philosopher Gilbert Ryle to
denote descriptions of social phenomena that include contextual information
which document participants own understanding of their motivations [@Ryle:1968].
The anthropologist Clifford Geertz popularized thick description as a way to
characterize successful ethnographic work, which recognizes that "what we call
data are our own constructions of other people's constructions of what they and
their compatriots are up to" [@Geertz:1973a, p.  9]. For Geertz, thick
descriptive accounts of culture interpret the flow of social practices, and
document enough of the context so that the account can be understood by someone
who is removed (in space or time) from the site of investigation. Thick
description clearly connects with the previously discussed approaches of Seaver
and Gusterson which seek to investigate computational systems as culture.

The combination of the three methods I have chosen provide a critical zooming
function, where the practices of multiple informants at multiple sites are
analyzed, before diving into a year long field study at a specific location, in
order to reassemble the relations that are discovered by zooming out again
[@Nicolini:2009]. The outline of these studies is as follows.

In Chapter 4, *Bots, Seeds and People* I discuss the results of Study 1, where I
conducted a series of semi-structured interviews with practicing archivists, and
archives adjacent actors, in order to hear how they decide how to archive
regions of the web. Interviews were recorded, transcribed, and coded using
*inductive thematic analysis* [@Braun:2006] to derive key factors that influence
and shape appraisal practices in web archives.

Chapter 5, Appraisal Talk, describes the results of Study 2, which applies
critical discourse analysis (CDA) to a subset of the transcripts created in
Study 1. CDA offers a theoretical framework grounded in critical theory for
analyzing how participants’ use of language reflects identity formation, figured
worlds and social relations, while also addressing the larger sociotechnical
context in which practice takes place.

Finally, in Chapter 6. Seeing Software I relate findings from a year long field
study at the National Software Reference Library (NSRL) at the National
Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) in Gaithersburg, Maryland. Since
1999 the NSRL has maintained one of the largest collections of software in the
world. While not a web archive in name, the NSRL contains software packages that
have been actively collected from the web as data. Crucially, the NSRL needs to
decide what software to collect from the web, and in doing so must balance the
needs of their customers with the architectural constraints of their repository
infrastructure, staff and funding mandate.

![Between-Method Triangulation](images/methods.png)

These three studies provide a zooming function in that they start with 1) what
people talk about when they talk about appraisal the web, 2) how they talk about
what appraising the web, and 3) what they do when appraising the web.
Conceptually 1 and 2 are about inferring practice through language use, and 3)
is concerned with observed practice in the field.

It was tempting to think that these studies as a whole would provide insights
about the design of web archiving systems. Especially for the NSRL study, I
wanted to yield results that could potentially benefit the organizationthat was
kind enough to host me. However it is not explicit purpose of my research
project to derive new designs for web archiving systems, but to generate new
knowledge about them. My goal in studying how appraisal is being enacted in web
archives is to shed light on how web archives themselves are conceived, and how
a more enlarged and theorized concept of web archiving practice can enrich
information studies pedagogy and historiography. As Dourish notes in his
influential piece critiquing the role of ethnography in design:

> It is practice that gives form and meaning to technology; the focus 
> of ethnography is the ways in which practice brings technology into 
> being. From this perspective ... we might suggest that what ethnography 
> problematizes is not the setting of everyday practice, but the practice 
> of design ... What matters is not simply what those implications are; 
> what matters is why, and how they were arrived at, and what kinds 
> of intellectual (and moral and political) commitments they embody, and 
> what kinds of models they reflect. [@Dourish:2006]

\pagebreak
