\pagebreak

## IV. Appraisal Practice

In this paper I have outlined how ideas of archival appraisal have developed over time, with the goal of showing how these conceptions are used (and not used) in the research literature of web archives. In examining the research literature of appraisal I have drawn on Foucault's idea of *governmentality* as a way of understanding how a wide set of archival appraisal practices reflect, repeat and respond to concerns of governance. However, for Foucault governmentality is about much more than simply the affairs of government and state: it also includes the practices of individuals, families and groups of all kinds:

> This word [government] must be allowed the very broad meaning it had in 
> the sixteenth century. "Government" did not refer only to political 
> structures or to the management of states; rather, it designated the way 
> in which the conduct of individuals or of groups might be directed:
> the government of children, of souls, of communities, of the sick. It did
> not only cover the legitimately constituted forms of political or economic
> subjection but also modes of action, more or less considered or calculated,
> which were destined to act upon the possibilities of action of other people.
> To govern, in this sense, is to structure the possible field of action for
> others. [@Foucault:1982, p. 790]

Foucault developed the concept of governmentality by examining how institutions like hospitals, schools, prisons, barracks, and even archives [@Foucault:1986] work to discipline, and delimit the field of action. Foucault's examination of specific practices and their relations is considered by many to be part of a general turn to practice in social theory. @Postill:2010 identifies Foucault as part of a first wave of practice theorists that also includes Ludwig Wittgenstein, Pierre Bourdieu, Anthony Giddens, and Michel de Certeau. He characterizes these thinkers as working to:

> ... liberate agency -- the human ability to act upon and 
> change the world -- from the constrictions of structuralist and systemic 
> models while avoiding the trap of methodological individualism. These 
> theorists regarded the human body as the nexus of people's practical 
> engagements with the world. (p. 7)

Practice theorists are interested in resolving the dialectic between individual agency and the social and material structures that constrain and reproduce it, through a material examination of the processes and routines that center on our  physical bodies and experience. @Giddens:1984 uses the idea of *structuration* to propose that agency and structure are mutually constitutive entities with equal status, each of which recursively reproduces the other. The idea of structuration has already seen some purchase in the field of archival studies where it has been used for understanding appraisal [@Brown:1991], descriptive practices [@Yakel:2003], the space/time dimensions of records [@Upward:1996 ; @Upward:1997], and the use of collaborative documentation networks.

Similarly @Bourdieu:1977's idea of *habitus* identifies the site of our lived experience which is shaped by social structures, which generate individual action. @Schwartz:1995 mobilizes Bourdieu when analyzing how archival photographs function as documents that both produce, and are the product of, social rules. @Gracy:2007 has also drawn on Bourdieu's notion of field, habitus and social capital in researching how commercial and nonprofit film archives operate. In some significant recent work @Ivanov:2017 conceptualizes archival theory in terms of practice theory, and uses both as a framework for examining record keeping practices in large news organizations.

At first it might seem strange to consider the physical body and its practices in relation to something as seemingly immaterial as the web. But the web and the underlying Internet are physical infrastructures that constantly generate records as we point and click in our browsers, swipe the screens of our smartphones, as we are quietly surveilled by the Internet of Things [@Acker:2016]. Archives of web content sediment on servers as we document our lives using record *making* technologies such as Facebook Live, which aren't always record *keeping* technologies [@Sheffield:2018]. Given this orientation towards practice and the general theoretical umbrella provide by Science and Technology Studies I will conclude by suggesting several promising areas for for future research into appraisal and web archives.

### Ethnography of Infrastructure

The ethnographic study of infrastructures in terms of the human practices that play out in their construction and use is well developed in information studies [@Suchman:1986 ; @Star:1999 ; @Bowker:2005]. For example @Edwards:2011a has examined how metadata practices work to shape knowledge production in the sciences. The mutually constitutive roles of policy, practice and design can shape infrastructures and define the controversies that surround them [@Jackson:2014c]. Social media applications like blogs have been studied for their role in shaping scholarly communication infrastructure [@Burton:2015]. The *convivial decay* of space science infrastructure has been investigated by @Cohn:2016, who found that notions of repair, aging and multiple intersecting life stories of people & machines played a significant role in how infrastructure is designed, deployed, used and then dismantled. @Karasti:2018 propose a methodological framework anchored in STS and anthropology for analyzing infrastructures over long time scales, that we see evidenced in the work of @Ribes:2009 on the *long now* of infrastructures.

The ethnographic study of web archiving infrastructure in particular has also begun, but more work remains. @Ogden:2017 provides a rare glimpse at how labor and infrastructure intersect in the practices of web archivists at the Internet Archive. Similarly @Kosnik:2016 has performed a detailed ethnography of archival practices in fan fiction communities on the web. This recent work connecting web infrastructure, archives, and social practices suggests further ethnographic investigations of how web archives both shape and are shaped by ideas of appraisal, or what is deemed valuable in the web.

### Repair and Maintenance

The turn to practice in Human and Computer Interaction (HCI) has been noted by @Kuutti:2014, who suggests that HCI's focus on user needs, or macro-level organizational systems are no longer sufficient for understanding the complex formations of users and systems we see today in digital environments. The study of computer systems in terms of practice offers a way of collapsing these  scales. Kuutti points out that the turn to practice in HCI research takes shape around issues of performativity of social practices, materiality of human bodies and artifacts, agency, and knowledge generation.

The role of repair as a site for design, in contrast to more conventional and celebratory notions of innovation, is detailed in ethnographic work by @Jackson:2014a, @DiSalvo:2010, @Rosner:2014 and @Maestri:2011. *Broken world thinking* [@Jackson:2014] specifically recognizes that design happens not only in the experimental setting of HCI research, but in our everyday lives as we learn to adapt and improvise solutions to conceptual and infrastructural breakdowns. Repair and breakdown are seen as two sides of the same coin of  maintenance. @Russell:2018 situate maintenance studies in terms of the history of technology, where the investigation of how standards are developed can help make sociotechnical assemblages legible [@Russell:2014 ; @Lampland:2009].

With the maintenance perspective in mind it is possible to broaden the scope of what appraisal means in web archiving systems to include not only the design and use of web archiving systems, but also the material practices and labor that sustain the web, as software is upgraded, vendor contracts are abandoned and content is ported from one system to another. Tracking these processes of data migration as appraisal decisions in web archives is a viable and under explored avenue for archival studies research, particularly in connection with postcustodial theories of the archive.

@Hedstrom:2002 suggests that the archivist's appraisal decisions are an essential part of the archive's *interface* with the past, found both on the screen, and embodied in the archivist. In some recent work @Maemura:2018 has begun to explore how archival decisions manifest in the provenance of web archival systems, in terms of the documentation they provide and the sociotechnical means by which that documentation is generated and conveyed. Further surfacing the repair work of archivists, and the web as a site for continual repair and maintenance is a key area for future research into archival appraisal on the web.

### Software Studies

The field of software studies provides a humanistic method for reading software and digital media systems as artifacts, with particular material, social and historical dimensions. For example, @Manovich:1999 has studied the database as a narrative form whose ontology structures the cultural artifacts that it helps generate. @Kelty:2008's pioneering ethnographic work has helped us understand open source software development communities as a *recursive public* that uses the infrastructure of the web and the Internet to develop and express what the Internet is, or can be.

Another class of research that fits (perhaps a bit less comfortably) under the rubric of software studies is work that explores the materiality of digital media in terms of inscription [@Kittler:1999], memory [@Chun:2011], digital storage and transmission [@Kirschenbaum:2008], protocols [@Galloway:2004], physical networks [@Starosielski:2015], documents [@Levy:2001 ; @Gitelman:2014], data representation [@Dourish:2017] and even archives [@Ernst:2013]. In this varied literature there is a consistent engagement with how data systems are anything but neutral [@Bowker:2005 ; @Gitelman:2013 ; @Walford:2017], and are configured by the material that they are constructed from, and by the design decisions of their creators and maintainers.

One relevant area for understanding appraisal in web archives is the growing fields of platform and algorithm studies, which are closely aligned, but operate from different levels of abstraction and granularity. Platform and  algorithm studies examine the social, political and cultural contingencies that the technologies provided by organizations like Google, Facebook, Twitter, Wikipedia coproduce with their publics and users. At the platform scale these contingencies manifest in established policies such as moderation rules, community guidelines, and terms of service documents, which are translated into actual practices, and in turn generate political economies [@Gillespie:2010 ; @Gillespie:2018]. Similarly algorithm studies, despite its usual association with computer science, provides a humanistic lens for studying the development, use and impact of computation in particular settings, enabled by specific practices, in order to achieve explicit or tacit ends [@Gillespie:2015 ; @Seaver:2017]. As such platform and algorithm studies fit within the scope of critical data studies [@boyd:2012], which shifts the focus from policy and code to flows and accumulations of data, and their politics [@Zuboff:2015 ; @Bratton:2016].

As noted by @Dourish:2017, it's awkward, and perhaps a bit misleading, to lump all these theoretical concerns into the category of *software studies*. However doing so, is a convenience that allow us to talk about the possible avenues of future research for web archives, especially with respect to appraisal. At the risk of introducing yet another category, @Kitchin:2014a draws on STS terminology to mobilize the idea of *data assemblages*, which are heterogeneous, sociotechnical constructs that resemble Foucault's *dispotifs* that act as bundles of "discourses, institutions, architectural forms, regulatory decisions, laws, administrative measures, scientific statements, philosophical, moral and philanthropic propositions" [quoted in @Kitchin:2014a]. Kitchin suggests several methods for studying the complex phenomena that are data assemblages:

1. examining code artifacts, their data inputs and outputs as time bound processes
2. reflecting on the writing & design of code, heuristics and algorithms
3. reverse engineering algorithms, to intuit processes and architectures that are hidden from view
4. conduct ethnographies of design teams to ascertain the contingent, relational, and contextual way software is produced
5. widening the ethnographic lens to consider institutional and organizational forces at work
6. widening the ethnographic lens yet again to consider the work that the algorithmic systems do in the world, either intended or unintended, and their social and historical significance

In some significant recent work @BenDavid:2018 used techniques from the study of *black box* algorithms (algorithms whose inner workings are secret, or so complex that they are unknowable) [@Diakopoulos:2014] to consider the epistemic role of web archives as fact or evidence producing systems. Ben-David specifically looks at the representation of the the North Korean top-level domain (.kp) in the Internet Archive's Wayback Machine, using traces of provenance information provided by the Wayback Machine's interface, in combination with the historical contingencies of DNS leak that occurred in 2016. Ben-David finds that the Wayback Machine's processes for acquiring data from the web are found to be iterative, top-down, bottom-up, and that they extend laterally outside of the Internet Archive organizational walls.

Similarly @Schafer:2016 employs techniques from STS to unpack the sociotechnical black-boxes of web archive infrastructure to stress the importance of web archives for Internet governance. Both pieces highlight how the quiet labor of web archives, performed by archivists in collaboration with, and sometimes in spite of, machines, are of historical and political significance. More work remains for understanding the technological, social and historical contexts in how these software systems, standards and organizations have developed--particularly with regards to our understanding of what a web archive is, what it is not, and how the difference is negotiated. The time is ripe for these analyses since we have 30 years of web, and 20 years of web archiving practice to study.

### Data Justice

And finally, a significant strand of work in the turn to practice has drawn attention to how the design of information systems can respond to the needs of  social justice. The imperative for technology to be designed by those who are supposed to ultimately use it was initially developed in the 1960s in Scandinavia, and gave rise to the field of participatory or cooperative design, which has garnered sustained interest from the HCI and Computer Supported Cooperative Work research communities [@Suchman:1986 ; @Ehn:1988 ; @Star:1996 ; @Kensing:1998]. Related concepts such as Communities of Practice [@Lave:1991] provide a rich methodological framework for understanding how social practices involving technology constitute the way we learn and work together in sustainable ways. Furthermore, the role of information technology infrastructures in measuring and making legible environmental change [@Edwards:2010 ; @Jackson:2014d] while also negatively impacting local and global environments [@Cubitt:2016] is an increasingly important area of concern. Indeed, the general thesis that there is no escaping the politics that are embedded in our technologies is a theme that is returned to again and again [@Winner:1980]. More recent recent work has explored how data infrastructures are both the product of, and can give rise to capacity building for mobilizing change [@Tufekci:2017 ; @Meng:2018]. This work uses an ethnographic approach to consider how data practices are part of a constellation of other social and political practices.

This research literature bundled under the theme of social justice in information technology intersects broadly with archival studies in significant ways. As noted by @Punzalan:2016, archives and memory studies have been perennially interested in the role of social justice. These researchers have worked to dispel the notion that archives are neutral in their representation of communities or society as a whole, and that they necessarily embody particular social and political values. Specifically the goals of community archives [@Flinn:2011] and participation in archival processes of appraisal and description have been marshaled from a variety of angles [@Gilliland:2014 ; @Huvila:2015] that mirror the goals of participatory design.

In terms of addressing web archives, and specifically the needs of archival appraisal, there has been some emerging work, but much remains. @Goldman:2018 has begun studying how digital preservation frameworks such as the Open Archives Information System (OAIS), and principles such as Lots Of Copies Keeps Stuff Safe (LOCKSS), can introduce overheads that negatively impact the environment, and if widely practiced, could undermine the long-term sustainability of data archives. @Christen:2017 has explored how values expressed in open access licenses and metadata standards can be at cross purposes with the ethical curation and access to cultural heritage materials. These risks can be mitigated by engagement with local communities and community archives practices. Furthermore, in the wake of the 2016 US Presidential Election the Environmental Data Governance Initiative worked to preserve at risk data sets produced by the Environmental Protection Agency and other US federal agencies. This work was articulated as a web archiving project, and was performed by volunteer archivists, librarians, technologists, scientists and concerned citizens [@Schlanger:2017]. Participants have reflected on how this *data justice* work fits into an evidence based accountability framework [@Dillon:2017]. But understanding how these and other emerging data justice projects [@Taylor:2017] take place both in and through the infrastructure of the web, and express implicit or explicit appraisal decision is work that remains.


