\pagebreak

## V. Methodology

Given these broad, interrelated topic areas for researching appraisal practice
in web archives from a Science and Technology Studies perspective I am planning
to conduct three research projects as a multi-site ethnography. Taken together
these projects will triangulate to provide a view into web archiving appraisal
practices, that will help describe the current state of the art, how we got
here, and what potential avenues might be for future development of appraisal in
web archives.

In the first research project I will conduct a series of semi-structured, ethnographic interviews with practicing archivists to understand how they decide what parts of the web to collect. An initial set of practitioners will be selected from a list of attendees at the Web Archives conference in Ann Arbor, Michigan on November 12-13, 2015. This conference brought together a diverse set of individuals involved in web archiving: archivists, researchers who used web archives, administrators of museums and libraries, open source software developers, and vendor representatives. A set of interview questions will be developed, which will be used to guide participants into sharing information about how they select content from the web for their archives. Interviews will be recorded and transcribed, and inductive thematic analysis will be used to derive key factors that influence and shape appraisal practices in web archives.

In the second study I will use techniques from Software Studies to investigate the development of web archiving technologies and standards. Specifically I will be examining the Heretrix and Wayback Machine codebases that were initially developed at the Internet Archive, and are now maintained as open source software projects. The code repositories will be used to both analyze the structure and evolution of algorithms and heuristics in the two codebases, and also to identify key individuals to interview who helped develop the software in its various phases. Similarly I will examine the historical development of the WARC Standard (ISO 28500:2017) which is used for serializing web archiving data, and deeply entangled with the software tools themselves. WARC, and its predecessor ARC, were developed largely at the Internet Archive in collaboration with digital preservation experts, and have in many ways shaped our understanding of what web archives are, and how they are assembled. Being able to situate appraisal practice among these tools and standards is essential because these are the infrastructures which web archives are built with.

Finally, in the third project I will conduct a year long field study at the
National Software Reference Library at the National Institute for Standards and
Technology in Gaithersburg, Maryland. Since 1999 the NSRL has maintained the
largest public repository of known software, out of which it publishes file
profiles and file signatures for use by law enforcement and other organizations
involved with computer forensic investigations. While not typically thought of
as a web archive, the NSRL contains software packages that have been actively
collected from the Internet and the web as data. These files are stored, indexed
and processed in order to publish the Reference Data Set (RDS) that documents
the fixities of hundreds of millions of computer files. Crucially, the NSRL
needs to decide what software to collect, and in doing so must balance the needs
of their customers with the architectural constraints of their repository
infrastructure, staff and funding mandate. In many ways the NSRL has been
developed idiosyncratically because of its unique role, and placement within the
federal government. Analyzing field notes, and in depth interviews with NIST
employees using grounded theory will provide essential material for tracing the
shape of appraisal in an infrastructural setting which does not necessarily fit
our usual conception of a web archive, or an archive, at all.

