## VII. Conclusion

#### Governmentality

Different readers of archives [@Mordell:2019] contrast with naturalness of
archives [@Moss:2018].

The empirically normal [@Lemke:2001 p. 194], the negative and positive lenses of
the NSRL through the RDS. This legibility project blurs public & private
(.gov/.com/.edu) through its partnership with forensic tool producers, academic
research, and other parts of government.

DFRWS started in 2001, the first two were held in Syracuse and then Utica New
York. It's goal was to broker an "open" conversation between government,
business and academia. See @DFRWS:2001 for a list of attendees which includes
two of the architects of the NSRL: James Lyle and Gary Fisher.

Lyle presented about CFTT and the need for testing digital forensics tools the
next year in 2002. @Lyle:2002.

Spafford at DFRWS and the relationship between Forensics, NSF and
Cyberinfrastructure.

Creation of Digital Investigation journal in 2003.

Foucault quote about aspirations to being a science: @Foucault:1997a, p. 10 -
relevance for Digital Forensics--look at the language in the report of the first
meeting of DFRWS. 

Agamben: state of exception

The promulgation of disk imaging in archives and digital curation. The disk image as an equivalent to the panopticon in foucault, as a way of knowing that gets dispersed. 

@Kirschenbaum:2009a

@Kirschenbaum:2010

@Woods:2009a

Knowledge-Power

public/private blurring

Wood:2019


Value of trace ethnography and ANT to understanding appraisal in web archives
and for building archives [@Gracy:2004]. Focusing on stories of impact.

Appraisal as a value driven process that is found all throughout archival
processes: description, access. Recall Yakel's work on representation here and
extend to web archives.

Review how appraisal in this case study can be explained by various theories of
appraisal, and where they break down. In particular I'm thinking about
macro-appraisal or functional analysis, which looks at the functions of
government. Maybe some day, NARA will receive the NSRL and make some kind of
decision about it based on the functioning of the NSRL's activities with law
enforcement or whatnot. But isn't it an archives before that transfer takes
place? Wasn't appraisal happening prior to this hypothetical transfer?
Obviously yes. This is where post-custodial thinking helps, but really, isn't
NIST a custodian of this data? Isn't it a bit derogatory to imply that they are
not caring for their archives? This is where the Records Continuum Model helps a
great deal. Except does it account for the role of record keeping technology
that we see present in the case of the NSRL?  Does it account for the story of
use and its links to values which is so central to my findings about appraisal?

Value not a property of records.

#### Use and Functional Analysis

How is my approach different? microappraisal. Microphysics of power.

#### Ontology

Why Different?

Why do we think of web archives as different?  What work is it doing to consider
web archives as different? 

Benjamin's idea of race as a technology. (From Amoore book talk)

The idea that ethics can be injected into collection isn't addressing that
collections have an ethics already. How to investigate these?

God's Eye View

Appraisal implies a view from outside whereby value can be ascertained, a god's
eye view (haraway). This can be seen in schellenberg's idea of historical value
of records, which imagines a future user, but is pragmatically based in
extrapolating from current historical research.

But what would a partial objectivity look like? Simon: satisficing.

Securitization of Society: Schuilenburg

Use seems to relate to functional analysis and macroappraisla but I need to
revisit that research literature to make an argument about it. Perhaps the point
above about God's Eye? There is no outside the system of values? The NSRL's
shaping of digital preservation theory and practice connects here too. Useful
archives pr archives of use "what is selected was useful at one point or
another" Ahmed (2020) p. 81. "Use can be out of time with the body". This
reminds me of the case  of the greene/jimerson debate about the nazi war
records.

The Internet Archive was built around the idea of ranking the web (Alexa) and
contained those roots until it began to branch out in its data collection (ref
Jess here?). One of the challenges web archives face is that they aren't
connected well with their users.

REST: web archiving only ever gets representations of resources, not the
resources themselves. the web is a thin veneer over complex data processing
architectures which are very difficult to freeze, especially because they
themselves are dependent on other web accessible resources. The situation is
improved somewhat when the representation and resource are closely aligned, as
with a static document (web v0.1 as opposed to web 1.0 or web 2.0).

Maintenance: Precarity, the feeble connection to the internet, the shutdown, the
pandemic, storage failure. The need for constant reprocessing (new fixity algos
and container formats). The precarity of the NSRL project is balanced by the
continuity and connections (even family relations) amongst the staff.  Their
lives are in this work.  Thinking about Cohn and Convivial Decay here. Also
thinking about Maintenance.  Is there a connection in the research literature
between maintenance and bureaucracy? The rhythm of the public RDS releases acts
like a heartbeat for the project. The 4 architectures of the NSRL database. The
move to AWS shifting maintenance. The constant work of research, conference
organizing, presentations: these are a form of care and maintenance.  Generosity
of Barbara and the NSRL inviting me in to do my research.

Dewey's idea of valuation and valorization. See journal.md

m
